---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/reference-notes/multi-tissue-analysis-of-co-expression-networks-by-higher-order-generalized-singular-value-decomposition-identifies-functionally-coherent-transcriptional-modules/","title":"Multi-tissue Analysis of Co-expression Networks by Higher-Order Generalized Singular Value Decomposition Identifies Functionally Coherent Transcriptional Modules","tags":["duke-nus","collaboration","PhD"],"noteIcon":""}
---

[[EnricoCoexpressionSVD.pdf]]

**Abstract**: Recent high-throughput efforts such as ENCODE have generated a large body of genome-scale transcriptional data in multiple conditions (e.g., cell-types and disease states). Leveraging these data is especially important for network-based approaches to human disease, for instance to identify coherent transcriptional modules (subnetworks) that can inform functional disease mechanisms and pathological pathways. Yet, genome-scale network analysis across conditions is significantly hampered by the paucity of robust and computationally-efficient methods. Building on the Higher-Order Generalized Singular Value Decomposition, we introduce a new algorithmic approach for efficient, parameter-free and reproducible identification of network-modules simultaneously across multiple conditions. Our method can accommodate weighted (and unweighted) networks of any size and can similarly use co-expression or raw gene expression input data, without hinging upon the definition and stability of the correlation used to assess gene co-expression. In simulation studies, we demonstrated distinctive advantages of our method over existing methods, which was able to recover accurately both common and condition-specific network-modules without entailing ad-hoc input parameters as required by other approaches. We applied our method to genome-scale and multi-tissue transcriptomic datasets from rats (microarray-based) and humans (mRNA-sequencing-based) and identified several common and tissue-specific subnetworks with functional significance, which were not detected by other methods. In humans we recapitulated the crosstalk between cell-cycle progression and cell-extracellular matrix interactions processes in ventricular zones during neocortex expansion and further, we uncovered pathways related to development of later cognitive functions in the cortical plate of the developing brain which were previously unappreciated. Analyses of seven rat tissues identified a multi-tissue subnetwork of co-expressed heat shock protein (Hsp) and cardiomyopathy genes (Bag3, Cryab, Kras, Emd, Plec), which was significantly replicated using separate failing heart and liver gene expression datasets in humans, thus revealing a conserved functional role for Hsp genes in cardiovascular disease.

## Notes

The paper uses a GSV algorithm that finds a common vector space that simultaneously diagonalizes several matrices. The matrices are coexpression matrices of genes. This matrix is computed for several cells and sites in our body. By incorporating this algorithm structure, they find the correlated genes whose pattern if existing in a certain cell can lead to abnormalities. The clusters of coexpressed genes undergo further filtering and refining that leads to defining cutoffs in the eigenspectrum corresponding to the weakly correlated genes. 

**Advantages of GSVD**
- Can be used to find common clusters of coexpression networks across cells because we find a common vector space that simultaneously diagonalizes the coexpression of several cells.
- We can filter out the weak clusters even if they are strong in a few cells.
